# Installation & Setup

> [!NOTE]
> If you have not yet installed the Zizq server, follow the
> [Getting Started](/docs/getting-started) guide first.

The official [Zizq Ruby Client](https://rubygems.org/gems/zizq) is available
through RubyGems. Add it to your application's `Gemfile`.

``` ruby
gem 'zizq', '~> 0.1.0'
```

Or install it manually:

```shell
$ gem install zizq -v 0.1.0
```

## Versioning

Zizq client libraries are versioned with the same version numbers as the Zizq
server, which follows the SemVer structure `[MAJOR].[MINOR].[PATCH]`.

Whenever a new major or minor version of the server is released, client
libraries with the same major and minor version numbers are also released. In
short, as long as the major versions match between the client and server, the
client should generally have an equal or lower minor version number than the
server. The client should never exceed the server version.

* It is safe to assume that a server version with the same major version number
  as the client and an equal or higher minor version number are fully
  compatible.
* A client with a different major version number to the server should be
  assumed to be incompatible.
* A client with the same major version number as the server but a higher minor
  version number may have support for newer features than the server has
  implemented and therefore those newer features may not work.
* The patch version numbers do not impact functionality at all.

For access to the latest features applications should generally match the major
and minor version numbers between the server and the client.

## Configuration

Once installed you can load Zizq into your application by requiring `"zizq"`.

``` ruby
require "zizq"
```

Out of the box, Zizq will communicate with the server on
`http://localhost:7890`, which is the default host and port. This should be
sufficient for local development, though you'll need to configure the client
for other environments.

> [!TIP]
> The best-practice way to do this is by specifying environment variables that
> your application reads and uses to set each configuration option. That is
> left as an exercise for the reader. Examples here are hard-coded for
> clarity.

Configuration is done by calling `Zizq.configure { ... }` wherever your
application typically bootstraps itself. In a Rails app this would be in a
`config/initializers/zizq.rb` file. In a Sinatra app this could be at the top
if your `app.rb` or even in your `config.ru` file.

``` ruby
Zizq.configure do |c|
  c.url = "https://host.your.network:7890"
  c.tls = { ca: "/path/to/server-ca-cert.pem" }
  c.logger = Logger.new("log/zizq.log")
end
```

> [!CAUTION]
> If your server is exposed directly to the internet, it should be using Mutual
> TLS otherwise anybody can communicate with it.

### Options

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Option</th>
            <th>Description</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>url</code></div>
                <div><pre>String</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                The base URL of the Zizq server.
                Default: <code>http://localhost:7890</code>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>tls</code></div>
                <div><pre>Hash</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>TLS options if the server is secured by TLS.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>tls[:ca]</code></div>
                <div><pre>String</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                The path to a PEM formatted file containing the server's
                certificate authority (for manually generated certificates,
                such as those generated by <code>zizq tls</code>). Also
                supports being given the entire PEM data as string.
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>tls[:client_cert]</code></div>
                <div><pre>String</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                The path to a PEM formatted file containing the client
                certificate for Mutual TLS authentication if enabled on the
                server. Also supports being given the entire PEM data as string.
                <em>Requires a pro license</em>.
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>tls[:client_key]</code></div>
                <div><pre>String</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                The path to a PEM formatted file containing the private key for
                Mutual TLS authentication if enabled on the server. Also
                supports being given the entire PEM data as string.
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>format</code></div>
                <div><pre>Symbol</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                The communication format used between the Zizq client and the
                server. One of:
                <ul>
                    <li><code>:json</code></li>
                    <li><code>:msgpack</code></li>
                </ul>
                Default: <code>:msgpack</code>.
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>logger</code></div>
                <div><pre>Logger</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                The logger instance for the Zizq client to to use when writing
                logs.
                Default: <code>Logger.new(STDOUT)</code>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>dispatcher</code></div>
                <div><pre>Object</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                A custom <code>Dispatcher</code> implementation for low-level
                job dispatch. This is any object that implements a
                <code>#dispatch</code> method to process a job from the Zizq
                server. Default: <code>Zizq::Job</code>.
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>enqueue_middleware</code></div>
                <div><pre>Zizq::Middleware::Chain</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                The middleware chain used for all job enqueues. Middlewares can
                be registered in the chain with
                <code>enqueue_middleware.use(middleware)</code>.
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <div><code>dequeue_middleware</code></div>
                <div><pre>Zizq::Middleware::Chain</pre></div>
            </td>
            <td>
                The middleware chain used for all job dequeues. Middlewares can
                be registered in the chain with
                <code>dequeue_middleware.use(middleware)</code>.
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
